# Fall of giants: biodiversity decay patterns in response to simulated waterscape degradation across European ecoregions 
Authors: David Cunillera-Montcusí1,2,3,4, Ana-Inés Borthagaray2, Jordi Bou5, Matías Arim2

Find here the repository and the used databases links (DATA_BASES_LINKS.txt) to download and reproduce the current analysis. Find at Supplementary material of the current work the information on the diversity decay parameters for all EU countries and EU ecoregions. 

Abstract  
1) Aquatic landscapes, or waterscapes, face severe threats from human activities propelling their deterioration. Waterscape degradation represents a main driver of the current diversity crisis, but its long-term consequences are difficult to quantify. In addition, the understanding of the potential effects of waterscape degradation on biodiversity at large spatial scales such ecoregions or countries remains limited. 
2) In this work, we advance on the potential trends in diversity decay in response to waterscape degradation across European ecoregions and EU countries. We reconstructed the European waterscape based on available satellite data and explored its connection with diversity patterns using metacommunity models. Subsequently, we generated a gradient of potential dispersal abilities and a gradient of waterscape degradation by systematically removing a percentage of habitat, estimating gamma diversity at each level of these gradients. We synthesized the diversity decay trends in two parameters: the proportional decay rate and the collapsing rate, which respectively inform about the speed of diversity loss and its acceleration as waterscape degradation progresses. 
3) Large differences in the potential response to waterscape degradation was observed across regions. Connectivity and water cover emerged as primary descriptors of diversity decay, with more heterogeneous regions generally exhibiting greater resistance to degradation.
4) Our study provides a first order approximation to an urgently needed information: the large-scale consequences of waterscape degradation for biodiversity. This contribution focus on the pure effect of landscape configuration, providing a general framework for interpreting the landscape-biodiversity connection in the face of global change. Furthermore, the theoretical perspective herein developed paves the way for the inclusion of further mechanisms and spatial explicit changes in landcover. This framework can improve conservation practices and facilitate the integration of alternative perspectives in management. The present results contribute to enhancing our understanding of the consequences posed by one of the principal threats to freshwater diversity but it also sets the background for breaking current conservation halts with novel perspectives. 

Keywords: Diversity decay; landscape fragmentation; habitat loss; landscape degradation; landscape conservation
